### Archie's Notes No. 15

#### MORAY HOUSE

We are all aware of this house and some of its history. However, in reading a pamphlet written some 60 years ago by two academics, Malcolm and Hunter, entitled a "Brief Sketch of the History of Moray House", it seemed to me that some of the research they made at that time might be interesting to Guides. The authors do not mention the date of the building of the house and my own books surprisingly come up with a number of different dates such as 1618, 1623, 1628 and 1633. The date I have always used myself is 1628 but the point may not be of great importance.

The House was built by the wealthy English widow, the Countess of Home, and designed by an unknown architect. The light grey stone house must have been attractive when ground level was some 3 feet lower than today with large gardens behind and trees and shrubs and flowers occupied now by buildings and pavements. The Countess of Home's Lodging was a great social centre in Edinburgh at the time. The Countess had two daughters and a son and no doubt hoped that the house would be the centre for a Home dynasty. The young Earl was the hope of his mother but, by the time the house had been built, he had been married twice but had no children. It appears that his main interest was sport, particularly horses and hounds for which he kept a stable nearby. His famous horse "Sweepstake" had a personal groom. A frequent visitor to the Royal Sports Field in London, he must have spent a great deal of money transporting himself and his horses. In 1631 he had to ask for more money to be sent to him in London. A servant was dispatched with £2229 in gold and a few days later his mother went herself carrying £1024. The pace however must have been too much for him as he died in 1632. This ended the dynastic hope of his mother and the Lady Home's Lodging would now pass to one of her daughters, Margaret, who had married James, Lord Doune, later fourth Earl of Moray. The house passed into the Moray family and the name we know it today.

In 1650, after the victory at Dunbar, Oliver Cromwell took over the house as his H.Q., at which time it must have seemed like a military garrison. One of the stories regularly quoted about the house was the famous "spitting" episode when the Marquis of Montrose was being trundled up the Royal Mile to be executed. The authors, in their research, certainly note that a wedding took place between Mary, the younger sister of the Earl, and Lord Lorne, later 9th Earl of Argyll. They claim however that the story was created later by political enemies and found ready acceptance. They make the point that the 2nd Marquis of Montrose and Lord Lorne came to a friendly arrangement regarding lands under dispute and when Montrose died in 1669, Argyll travelled from Inverary to Perthshire to attend the funeral.

Moray House was at its brightest from 1677-87 when the wit and fashion of Edinburgh gathered there and Moray carried out a fairly active political life and was involved in various intrigues with his Royal Patron.

The authors also repudiate the story that Lord Seafield, Lord Chancellor from 1701-07, being resident in the House when the Treaty of the Union was under negotiation, was attacked by an Edinburgh mob in the Summer House and fled to another house near the City Chambers. Their reasoning centres round the fact that Lord Seafield had a suite of rooms in Holyrood Palace and by all accounts was a vain man who regarded his Palace address as a measure of his social status and therefore would not have used Moray House. Secondly, the document was the result of an Act of Parliament, made and ratified like every other measure in Parliament. That done, before dismissing the last Scottish Parliament (at least until recently), he cynically announced the famous words "and that's the end of an auld sang". The Chancellor and Queensberry were certainly pelted as they drove down the Royal Mile but no windows were broken in Moray House.

A little surprisingly there is no evidence of the House being used by Jacobites during the Bonnie Prince Charlie invasion of 1745. The Canongate house seems to have gone out of favour with the family for a period and in 1752 they let the house to Lord Milton and fellow Directors of the British Linen Co. For about 38 years the House and grounds were alive with businessmen and linen manufacturers supervising their products and carters leading their horses to wooden storehouses in the gardens.

In 1755 the south wing was built with private tenants having their homes on the top floor. Lord Kames was one of the first tenants. In 1791 the Linen Company moved to Tweeddale Court and gradually the House and gardens returned to their normal appearance. The new resident was Charles Cowan, papermaker, and he had a pond installed with a life size figure of a fisher named Peter. The Cowans, father, son and grandson who lived in the house for over 50 years, kept the property and gardens in excellent order. Alex. Cowan, in 1845, left the House in deference to an appeal by the North British Railway Co. who sought a home for pensioners they were dislodging from old houses below the Calton. In fact the pensioners had other arrangements made and eventually the Railway Co. put the house up for sale.

We now come to the period when the house comes into its educational era. The parent of Moray House College was the Edinburgh Sessional School which began in Leith Wynd in 1813. It became popular and moved to Market Street in 1824. At that time there was great discussion taking place on teachers' training. In 1838 the school came under the control of the Church of Scotland. However the Disruption of 1843 created problems but churchmen of all persuasions supported the school. Accommodation problems beset the school and they relocated to Carruber's Close and then Rose Street (behind the Music Hall) but it was now felt a new purpose building should be obtained. A site at Lauriston was considered but, in 1845, another site was found on ground near Spittal Street and the foundation stone was laid in May of that year. It could still be there but the authors could find no trace. The plans were however becoming too expensive for the fledgling new Free Church. Fortunately, at this time Moray House came on the market and was purchased for £2862 and, while alterations and additions had to be made, a new era had begun for the ancient Lady Home's Lodgings. The view of the authors may alter our previous knowledge of the House but it confirms again that Old Edinburgh's history is very often a mixture of fact and legend and we must make our own judgment as to the dividing line!

#### TEASER

Last issue's Teaser was: Where will you find St.Ninian, St.Kentigern, St.Magnus and St. Columba, etc, etc. The figures are all represented on the bronze doors of St. Andrew's House, Waterloo Place.

The Teaser this time is "We all know Waterloo Place but where is the Waterloo Well?

#### MUSIC FESTIVAL 1815

This was the first of its kind in Scotland and was well reported in the Edinburgh Annual Register. Reference was made to the extensive arrangements which had been made and to the excitement of the public for this event. The Festival was to take place in Parliament House and all tickets had been sold in advance. There was such a demand for tickets that the fear of not getting a seat brought crowds to the street as early as 8am. The first day's programme consisted of "A Grand Miscellaneous Act" from the works of Handel, together with Haydn's "Creation". The next day the performance was "The Messiah" and apparently 2100 people attended but 600 were left outside. The last day's performance was the finest, with a selection by Handel, Beethoven and Mozart. The tremendous success of the Festival was regarded as a new era in the musical annals of Scotland.

#### DID YOU KNOW?

1\. Catherine Sinclair, whose memorial is at the foot of N. Charlotte St., established two cooking depots for the poor, one in Queensferry St. and the other on George IV Bridge.

2\. Some of the stones of the Old Calton Jail were used to renovate the Norman Church at Dalmeny.

3\. The first appearance of the "cuckoo" at the Floral Clock was in 1905. 4. Cromwell made St.Cuthbert's West Kirk a barracks in 1650.

5\. The first appearance of coaches in Edinburgh was on 30 May 1603 when Anne of Denmark went to St. Giles in her own coach.
