### Archie's Notes No. 21

#### THE SCOTTISH REFORMATION

was part of a Northern European movement which began to manifest itself in the early 1500s. Some historians put the date at 1517 when Martin Luther, a monk at Wittenburg in Saxony, nailed his "95 Theses" to a church door there. It is doubtful if Luther could have realised the effect that this action would have on the Catholic Church. Luther, in effect, wanted major church reform and questioned the moral authority of the church to "sell salvation". Protests such as these were treated as an act of heresy with the possibility of being burned at the stake. However Luther was fortunate he had the support of German princes which ensured his survival. With the help of a rapidly emerging and improving printed press, Protestantism spread quickly across Western and Northern Europe creating conflict and a split in the church. One of the other great figures on the Protestant scene was the French theologian, John Calvin, who had located in Geneva. There was also a division in Protestant ranks between Lutherans and Calvinists. This division eventually separated the Lutheran churches of North Germany and Scandinavia from the Calvinists of South Germany and Switzerland. John Knox, who was later to become the "father" of the Scottish Reformation, was exiled at Geneva and studied with Calvin. These changes and attitudes were also being noticed in the UK. Henry VIII of England broke away from Rome and introduced a bible translated into English and he and his son Edward VI adapted, as its established form, Episcopal Protestantism, said to have been created largely by Archbishop Thomas Cranmer. The new ideas were also spreading to Scotland and Mary of Guise, Mary Queen of Scots mother, as Regent, was trying to hold the Catholic and French position with the support of French officials and French troops. The Scottish Reformers, still in an embryonic state, went "underground" and met in small groups. The desire for change grew steadily which may have been as much to do with the wish to remove French dominance as Protestant conversion. Power politics were coming in to play with a Pro-English faction operating. There was a pause in the advance when Queen Mary of England came to the throne, bitterly opposed to Protestantism. The situation changed again when her half-sister, Elizabeth, came to the throne and England, which wanted to break the Scottish/French alliance, supported the Scots Protestants which were now being headed by a group of nobles and eminent people, calling themselves the "Lords of the Congregation", who would support and protect them. One of whom was James Stewart, half-brother to Mary. John Knox, who had been in constant written communication with Scotland during his exile, returned to Scotland in 1559 and a new impetus was given to the Reformation. Knox seemed to have understood early, the power of the written word particularly with the introduction of the printing press and apart from his letters he wrote pamphlets which he sent home to be copied and distributed amongst the populace. Even then however it might all have failed if the English fleet had not arrived in the Forth in early 1560 which altered the balance of power and forced the French to retreat to Leith. In June 1560, Mary of Guise died allowing negotiations to begin between Scotland, England and France to conclude "The Treaty of Edinburgh" which secured the French and English withdrawal from Scotland. An interesting historical note here is that Knox was excluded from the negotiations because of his earlier writing "The First Blast of the Trumpet against the Monstrous Regiment of Women" which, although not written against Elizabeth, was a slight she could not accept. Knox had written it against Mary of Guise and Mary of England also, it has been suggested, against the mother of his first wife! Another feature of her displeasure was that, when Knox was returning to Scotland from Geneva he wanted to travel back via England, Elizabeth refused to authorise this passage. It is thought he returned by sea on his brother's ship. On 10 July 1560, a new Scots Parliament met in Edinburgh which decided that Papal jurisdiction would be repudiated and celebration of mass cancelled. The wealth of the old church would be distributed to the reformed ministry, schools and the poor. Also approved was a new reformed Confession of Faith. The shape of the new church was left open and the decisions made at the first Parliament were not ratified until the Parliament of James VI in 1567. The decision was made to adopt the Presbyterian format as against the English type Episcopacy (government by Bishops). Presbyterian, so called because the government of the church appointed by the New Testament, was by presbyteries or associations of ministers and elders, rulers equal in power and office. John Knox, although the most well-known and probably the most charismatic, was not the only main figure in the Reformation. He had been however, significantly involved in the compilation of the Book of Discipline which emphasised the introduction of representative church government and congregational participation in English and setting out visionary aims encompassing poor relief and even more importantly a school in every parish. During Knox's exile abroad, John Willock from Ayrshire travelled the country, preaching the reform and was regarded by fellow preachers as the "Primate". Erskine of Dun was another stalwart and George Buchanan another. In fact, however, there was a cast of thousands in this enterprise. The learned George Wishart, a mentor to Knox, who had been executed at St Andrews in 1546 was probably one of the main the catalysts to set the movement alight. A group sometimes referred to as the "Heretics" for preaching the new reform, Patrick Hamilton, Henry Forrest, Norman Gourlay, David Straiton of Lauriston and the last in 1558, Walter Mylne were all executed. The introduction of the new Reformed Church did not go ahead effortlessly. There were many problems not the least of which was the shortage of acceptable ministers and this was highlighted in the General Assembly of 1567 when it was said that the church was in "disarray". As there was no work for the former Catholic priests, many converted and some were appointed as "Readers under supervision". It was to take at least two generations before the Church of Scotland was running as Knox and his supporters had planned.

#### TEASER

The Teaser in Chat 20 was: What was referred to as the deid chalk? This was a name given to a dinner held by Town Councillors following an execution.

The Teaser this time is "Frederick Chopin was in Edinburgh for a short time in 1848. During his visit he stayed with a friend at 10 Warriston Crescent and gave a recital at the Hopetoun Rooms in Queen Street. During his visit he wrote a piece of music. What was this piece of music called?

#### CLARET

Auld Edinburgh's favourite tipple. Alan Ramsay wrote:

Guid Claret best keeps out the cauldAn drives awa' the winter soonIt makes a man baith gash and bauldAn heaves is saul ayont the moon.

Claret, the wine of Bordeaux and the dark powerful drink which linked Scotland and France so closely that it was known as the "Bloodstream" of the Auld Alliance. Ramsay wrote that the wine was a staple beverage in Edinburgh with claret carts as common as milk floats became in the 20thC. The origins go back some 700 years to the Auld Alliance and the later support in the 15thC by Scots for the French in endeavouring to remove the English from that SW corner of France. One of the long term rewards was the granting of commercial privileges in the wine trade over other nations. The pre-emption of the first choice wines possibly forced the English to go further south to the Portuguese Duoro area for port. These special privileges lasted up until the 1660s. The trade was the responsibility of the Monks of St. Anthony, originally from Vienne on the Rhone, and they obtained much of their income from sales to Edinburgh merchants. I believe that the vaults where they stored the wine are still in existence. When the Reformation ended the direct French influence at the Scottish Court, the Scots colony in Bordeaux increased with teachers and intellects spreading the teaching of Knox and Calvin to the strongly Protestant Huguenot region. Later these were joined by politically exiled Jacobites. Jacobites and other nationalists drank claret as a symbol of Scottish Independence rather than succumb to the "politically correct" port. It became the situation that the country was almost united in seeing claret as a symbol of Scottish unity. This was highlighted by practically everyone turning a blind eye to the considerable smuggling going on. It was further reinforced when the English tried to tax it and price it out of the market. "Free Trading", as the smuggling was called, was often carried out through Agents in Guernsey who purchased the wine for their Scots merchant customers but put it in Spanish casks and labelled as Spanish wine. Apart from aristocrats, the people who most ignored the smuggling were the legal profession, lawyers and judges. The common measure of the time was the Choppin (a generous quart) and the more common Tappit Hen, a lidded jug (the name from the French "la topynotte"). Gradually, however, the restrictions of the British Government strangled the trade and also the rising of a new temperance movement. Tea also came on the scene. Whisky also started to establish itself to the point where everyone believed it to be the national drink. Claret began to move up the social scale and away from the poorer population.
