### Archie's Notes No. 9

#### A SUMMARY OF THE DEVELOPMENT OF HOLYROOD PALACE

James IV ordered the ground close to the Abbey to be cleared for the Palace which his Master Mason, Leonard Logy, a churchman, planned while the practical masonry was undertaken by Walter Merlion, Michael Wright and William Turnbull. Merlion was a naturalised Frenchman who had residence in the High Street, known by his name, until it was removed in 1787 to make way for the South Bridge. James, eager to have his residence completed for his marriage in 1503, pressed his workmen hard. Michael Wright built the "Queen's Great Chamber", Merlion the Hall and Turnbull the "Long Gallery". The work was not fully completed when James left for Flodden in 1513. In 1515 work was continued by the Duke of Albany, a kinsman of James, who had come from France to act as Governor of Scotland.

James V carried on alterations, particularly to the interior. A considerable work force was assembled, consisting of masons (some French), wrights, plasterers, wood polishers, quarriers, carters and labourers. The dressed stone, shipped from Culross, was carted from Leith while the coarse rubble stone came from the quarries of Stanehouse, Niddry, Granton, Craigmillar, Ravelston, and Salisbury Crags.

In the invasions of 1544 and 1547 the English damaged the buildings. The buildings were rebuilt but the old Abbey was altered. At this time the Commendator or Abbot, was Lord Robert Stewart, a natural son of James V who had come from France. He leased lands around the Abbey to nobles and houses were built here and there on Abbey grounds. For his own use, he had a two storey house built with dormer windows to the forefront of the Palace and to the north of James IV's tower and immediately in front of the Abbey West Door. The building work continued so that it might be ready for the arrival of the young Mary and apparently successfully, for the Queen later described it as "a very large and magnificent Palace". There was not, however, room for all her courtiers and around 1564 she had built on the east side of the Palace a house for Patrick, Lord Ruthven. The Earl of Gowrie's house, as it became known, stood for around a century.

When James VI decided to return to Scotland from London he instructed in advance that the Palace was to be "reformit" and made suitable for the nobles of England who were coming with him in 1617. Much was changed and cleared including an "auld decayit chapel" which was the former chapel of the hospital of St. Thomas and St. Andrew located at the foot of the Canongate and apparently fitted out by James IV for his Queen.

Charles I took an interest in the Palace and made changes in 1626 and 1627 and had in mind even greater changes but these were never completed as a result of his monarchical problems. During the period of the Commonwealth, General Monck's troops were quartered in the building and accidentally set fire to it. Cromwell ordered that the damage should be made good.

Charles II was interested in the Palace and planned a reconstruction in 1671. He appointed Sir William Bruce as his architect and Robert Mylne as Master Mason although he apparently kept a very "hands on" approach. The final work, which took some 7 years, was very much as we see the outside today.

James, Duke of York, brother of the King, continued to make alterations when he was in residence. He had a tennis Court (Royal Tennis) built which was a large wooden structure, roofed, walled and floored, where the Duke and his friends played. Theatrical groups from London apparently used it, one of which has been said to be Shakespeare's company although evidence of that seems to be sketchy. These theatricals gave great offence to the ministers of Edinburgh. In 1687 James wanted the Abbey Church as a Chapel Royal and a place of worship for the Knights of the Thistle. To remove the Canongate parishioners who were using it as their place of worship, he gave them the mortification (bequest) of one William Moodie to establish the Canongate Parish Church in 1688.

William and Mary did not appear to have any interest in Scotland and the Palace was retained merely as a meeting place for the Privy Council until 1707 when it ceased to exist. After 1707 the building, although regally neglected, still had money spent on it. The historic Picture Gallery was saved from destruction and other rooms were repaired. In the 1830s, the old Commendator's House was demolished. Great changes were made to the Palace precincts after the visit of Queen Victoria in 1850. Many old houses which surrounded the Palace were bought and removed and walls established. The citizens of Edinburgh seemed to approve of the alterations done by the Queen and subscribed £500 for a statue of her to be made. In 1851 the statue, 8 feet high including the pedestal, by Handyside Ritchie, was placed in front of the Palace where it stood for 8 years. In his book "Statues and Monuments of Edinburgh" Michael Turnbull says that Queen Victoria took a dislike to this statue. It was taken down to be replaced by the fountain which Queen Victoria had commissioned as a replica of the one at Linlithgow. The statue was apparently given to Wyndham's Queen's Theatre and Opera House in Broughton Street which was destroyed by fire in 1865 The theatre was rebuilt in 1876 and later called the Theatre Royal.

#### TEASER

In the early 1680s, Charles Maitland, Lord Hatton, Master of the Scottish Mint, Privy Councillor and Lord of Session built a mansion and garden on ground he had bought. What and where is the mansion today?

Last issues Teaser. The "dormitory" is the enclosed roofless area at the east end of St.John's Episcopal Church, Princes Street. In the section are the graves of Sir Henry Raeburn and the mother of Sir Walter Scott.

#### EDINBURGH'S WATER SUPPLY.

We are all aware of the story of the bringing of water to the Royal Mile from Comiston Springs. In reading a series of papers prepared in 1983 by the then Lothian Regional Council's Department of Water and Drainage the following story of the Water Supply is quoted. In summary it says that, in the 1600s, George Sinclare, a Leith schoolmaster and former Professor of Mathematics at Glasgow University and apparently also a noted scientist, had made a study of the Comiston Springs. He submitted a plan to the authorities demonstrating the feasibility of bringing a piped water supply to the town of which it was desperately in need. Sinclare's plan was ambitious for the time but was accepted by the Council and he was paid £66.13.4d for his advice. The actual undertaking was in charge of a Dutch engineer, Peter Bruschi, who estimated the cost at £2900. The water from the first spring was piped to the city in 1676 and 3 other springs were added in 1681. Bruschi was given a bonus of £50 for his diligence in executing the work. There were 27 springs on the Comiston estate and the first drawn were given the names of animals, e.g. hare, pewit, tod (fox), and swan. The four springs were led to a collecting cistern in a stone house still to be seen today. At each of the points where the pipe entered the tank there was placed a little white painted figure of the animal after which the spring was named. From this water house the combined water supply was almost 200,000 gallons a day and as little as 20,000 gallons in dry weather conveyed to the old town in 3 inch lead pipes buried a foot underground to Castlehill. The route, described as a triumph of civil engineering of the time, was Braidburn Valley Park, Hermitage of Braid, Cluny, Canaan Lane, Whitehouse Loan, Marchmont, Meadows, Infirmary, Grassmarket to a steep ascent through a 6 foot wide tunnel in the Castle Rock and then to the large tank at Castlehill. The cannonball at Cannonball House is mentioned as the gravity mark to indicate a height of 329 feet compared with 389 feet at Comiston.

In 1720 other springs were being tapped to increase the flow and wider pipes introduced. The engineer of this work was a German named Covey and when the City dignitaries and other VIPs came to see the grand opening, the valves were opened and lo and behold nothing!!! There was consternation and indignation and Covey, in extreme embarrassment, set out on horseback to Comiston. Apparently panic reigned but Covey could not solve the problem. Then a canny Scots workman stepped forward and, under Covey's anxious eye, drove a nail into the pipe. There was a loud hiss as an airlock cleared. The water then flowed, no doubt to belated cheers at Castlehill and to the relief of Herr Covey! During the initial work on the Comiston scheme constant vigilance was maintained in view of the original opposition by so many citizens and an edict was issued by the authorities warning likely saboteurs of the severe penalties which would result if the pipes were damaged. The reason for the opposition? A water tax! Eventually people appreciated the "sweet waters of Comiston" and queued up at the various wells with a great variety of containers. Artistically designed pitchers became popular wedding presents. The queues could be long however and arguments often occurred as a result of queue jumping, or in dry weather the slowness of water from the tap. Regulations were brought out with penalties for assaults or bad language while "waiting at the well".
