### Archie's Notes No. 20

At the 2007 Annual General Meeting I was asked to write something about the following Scots heroine, whose only visible memorial in Edinburgh is the plaque which we pass on our walks on the wall at 219 High Street. Because of the greater number of visitors who now come from Eastern Europe and also the movement afoot to provide a more significant memorial, it was felt we should now give more prominence to this extraordinary lady on our tours. While in no way is this article to be regarded as definitive it should give enough background information for your tour.

#### DR. ELSIE MAUD INGLIS (1864-1917)

It is said that prophets are never honoured in their own country and this is certainly the case in regard to Elsie Inglis. One of the great Scotswomen, a heroine in her time, she still leaves her legacy to women today.

Elsie Inglis was born in India, daughter of a senior official in the East India Company. The family returned to her father's home town, Edinburgh, when she was 14 years of age. At a time when women were not encouraged in the Medical profession and there were very few women doctors, she decided to study at the Edinburgh School of Medicine and qualified in 1892. She subsequently became a surgeon at the old Bruntsfield Hospital. Elsie Inglis was certainly a feisty, independent individual and the male- orientated teaching of medicine at the time infuriated her. The medical needs of women were overlooked and in many respects women were treated as second class citizens. An example of this was that no woman could undergo an operation without her husband's consent and there were cases where a husband's refusal left the wife to a lingering death. She had a special sympathy for poor women and wanted to establish an understanding medical care for them. Towards this goal she set up a small maternity unit in upstairs rooms at 219 High Street. She wanted more however and in 1901, with her father's moral and financial support, she opened up at Abbeyhill a larger and more complete maternity home which was to serve the women of Edinburgh for many years after. Dr.Inglis played a notable role in establishing the Scottish Women's Suffragette Federation. The outbreak of the First World War brought an end to such campaigns and in October 1914 she offered her surgical abilities to the Royal Army Medical Corps. Their reply has gone down into legend "My good lady - go home and be still".

Dr Inglis, however, would not accept such a decision and decided that she would set up an all-women hospital and appealed for donations to help in the Â£50,000 cost in setting up a hospital with tents, beds, medical and cooking equipment etc. The appeal caught on and donations poured from all over the world. The British Army was not keen on the idea of a field hospital staffed by women and rejected her offer. However a similar offer made to the French was immediately accepted and within a few months a mobile hospital of 200 beds was set up just north of Paris. She then became active in setting up other units in Serbia, Greece, Romania, Malta, Corsica and Russia. Dr Inglis herself joined the Serbian unit in April 1915 and described the situation as appalling. "The site of the hospital was terrible, the sights and smells beyond description. We dug rubbish into the ground, built incinerators and cleaned and cleaned". The condition wounded soldiers had been living in was horrific. In October 1915 the area in which they were located was overrun by the Austrian, German and Bulgarian armies and the Scots Women's Hospital was advised to leave with the Serbian Army but they refused. The female staff were captured but continued to work, attending the wounded from all sides. U.S. diplomatic pressure obtained their release and they arrived home in early 1916. Undaunted, Dr.Inglis set out with another team to the eastern front in Russia, getting there via Archangel and Moscow. The conditions there were even worse, where she found some 11,000 wounded and only one surgeon. The troops were lying around anywhere in their uniforms with wounds undressed. Again they had problems with a retreat and were driven back to the Ukraine where the Bolshevik Revolution trapped them for 5 months. Nothing further could be done so Dr.Inglis headed home, by now extremely ill with stomach cancer, where she died on 26th November 1917 a day after her arrival in Newcastle aged 53. Her funeral was held in Edinburgh, at St Giles, with full military honours, the coffin draped with the flags of Britain and Serbia. She was buried in the Dean Cemetery. Posthumously she was awarded high honours by France, Russia and Serbia. Neither she nor her nurses received any awards in their lifetime from Britain. The Serbs said at the time that "Scotland made her a doctor but Serbia made her a saint". Elsie Inglis was a courageous woman who showed a great spirit of humanity to all with drive, vision and a natural authority. As a surgeon, she brought a permanent change in the manner the medical profession saw women's place in medicine. In so doing brought honour to both Edinburgh and Scotland. Winston Churchill said of her and her team "The record of their work lit up by the fame of Dr.Inglis will shine in history". Sadly the shine has gone and we have forgotten except maybe for the diminishing number who were born in "Elsie Inglis". In our tours let us not forget when we pass the plaque high on the wall in the High Street. Let us hope that there will be some more significant memorial in the future.

Although not directly for Elsie Inglis, there is a plaque on the south side of St.Andrew Square, unveiled in 2001 by Princes Anne, to the staff of the Scottish Women's Hospitals for Foreign Service who worked and gave their lives in WW1 and WW2.

#### TEASER

Issue 19 was what were "Wellington's Ears"? They were so called because they were reputedly worn by the Duke of Wellington. They were in fact a primitive form of hearing aid, less than effective, which was made in the shape of an ear with ribbons attached to be tied at the back of the head. They were made of various materials such as paper-mache, silver and shells and presumably thought to amplify sound. They were not really successful and where used, became a source of amusement. However if you were deaf and had to resort to the large ear trumpet some people probably thought they were worth a try.

The Teaser this time is " What was referred to as the deid chalk"?

#### DID YOU KNOW?

Edinburgh's first traffic lights began operating at the junction of York Place and Broughton St. on 21 March 1928.
