### Archie's Notes No. 17

#### JAMES SKENE OF RUBISLAW (1775-1864)

This is a name of which you are probably aware and one that flits in and out in Edinburgh history books time and time again. It recently dawned on me that I knew very little about the man so I set out to find out a little more. Skene was one of the closest of Sir Walter Scott's friends and confidants and during Scott's later years in Edinburgh was always on hand to accompany him on visits and walks. He was the last survivor of six of Scott's best friends. Latterly living in Castle Street, he was a close neighbour to Scott at his home in No. 39. He had supported and been involved with Scott in the establishment of The Edinburgh Academy and they were both members of the Edinburgh Light Horse regiment and set up a semi-military club under that name. Skene, however, was a notable character in Edinburgh in his own right, an Advocate and Secretary to the Board of Trustees for Manufacturers. For a period Skene lived in Princes Street and no doubt was affected, like many others, with the odour coming from the Nor Loch with its sewage from the Old Town. Skene became one of the prime movers in its effective drainage and the design of the new Gardens for the benefit of Princes Street residents. The steep south side was planted with trees and walks were constructed from the Esplanade down to the valley floor. In the end there was, as you might expect in Edinburgh, some criticism levelled at Skene for the planning but Walter Scott stood up for him and said he had conducted this with much taste. Scott felt that the criticism was the usual reward for public exertion! Such was the affection held by Scott for Skene that he included his name in a poem in "Marmion".

_And such a lot, my Skene was thine,When thou of late were doomed to twine.._

When plans were mooted for the railway through Princes Street Gardens, Skene, on behalf of the Street proprietors, vigorously opposed the project and succeeded in halting the plan. The railway authorities however returned with the project in 1840. Skene, at the time was living abroad, shops were opening in Princes Street and there was now less opposition. Work began on the Railway in 1845 and the first train through the valley was in August, 1846.

Skene of Rubislaw was also a talented water colour painter, apparently starting to sketch when he lived with his mother in Riddle's Court. He drew and wrote of life in Edinburgh at the time but his works were never published. His writing and drawings are, however, still preserved in the Edinburgh Room of the Library. He was probably instrumental in the placing of the Scandinavian Runic Stone on the top part of Princes Street Gardens near the Esplanade Wall. It is suggested that this stone may have been held in the old Museum of Antiquaries and, if you are not aware, the Runic inscriptions translate to, "Ari engraved this stone in memory of Hialm his father. God rest his soul" The stone was reputedly brought from Sweden by Sir Alexander Preston in the 16th century. Skene's latter years were spent in Oxford and it is said that he possessed the Bible used by Charles I on the scaffold at his execution.

#### BILL WILLIAMSON

Not long before his death our Past President, Bill Williamson, sent me this poem for inclusion in the "Chat". He thought it an amusing wee gem and I include it as a memory to a great character and also a tremendous worker for the Association over many years.

A REEKIE WID DREMEI had an unco dream the ither nicht,I dreamt the Castle and the Castle Rock,Had disappeared - clean vanished frae the sicht,Doon the volcanic plug -hole. Whit a shock!The view frae Princes Street wid break yir hairt,Just naething! A' the Bailies had assembled,To view the damage frae the safest airt -Ae muckle hole. Some grat and aithers trembled,"Man this'll kill the tourist trade fir shair,But - maybe we could hae a car park noo"The polis moved me on; I heard nae mair,But saw, before I left for the Buroo,A message chalked by bodies wi' a grouse,"Site of the Ring-Road - Sewage - Opera House"

#### TEASER

The answer to the Teaser in No 16 is James Graham, Marquis of Montrose, executed at the Mercat Cross in 1650. The lines are from his poem "My dear and Only Love".

The Teaser this time is "There used to be a clock and a barometer in the alcoves in front of Register House but what was the original purpose of the alcoves?

#### NETHERBOW PORT

This, the most famous of the auld toon's gates, was the principal entrance from the east, especially London and the Port of Leith. There were three successive Netherbow Ports but I understand that there are no representations of the two earlier gates. The second was thirty yards nearer John Knox House than the last one which was taken down in August 1764, the material being sold by public auction. It was a massive building and said to have been a copy of the ancient Port St.Honore in Paris. The bell of the Port was cast at Campvere in Holland in 1621 at the same time as the bells of St. Giles. The Port was an important part of the town's history with the entry of various sovereigns, the defence in wartime and the involvement in various city "tulzies". Following the "Porteous Riots" in 1736 the Government, in its anger and to punish the Town, imposed penalties. One of these penalties was that the Netherbow Port was to be dismantled. Wiser counsel in London prevailed on the Queen to commute the penalties to a money payment. One of the conditions remaining however was that the gates of the Port were to be "cleekit back", to stand open day and night so that they would be open if troops were required to pacify the town. This restriction was eventually lifted and the gates allowed to be closed. There were apartments for rent in the Port and also a smithy and an adjacent coffee house. The bell has now been re-sited in the tower of the new Netherbow Centre and also given a new situation is the James and Anne plaque, dated 1606, which was part of the Port. You are probably aware that the Clock, which was on the Port, is now above the Gallery of Modern Art, the former Orphans Hospital.

#### DID YOU KNOW?

1\. In 1745 there were nine Presbyterian churches in old Edinburgh, seven inside the walls and two outside. These were the four divisions of St. Giles and the two at Greyfriars; Trinity College Church; the Tron Kirk; Lady Yesters; and St. Cuthbert's and the Canongate outside the walls.

2\. In the 1750s there were something like 600 tavern licences within the Burgh. It is said that the town was a byword for drunkenness and the legal profession was in the forefront in this respect. In a book written by James Buchan he quotes that in 1716, at their mother's funeral, the future Lord President of the Council, Duncan Forbes and his brother, were so drunk on the way to the kirkyard that they left the body behind.
