### Archie's Notes No. 12

#### INTERNATIONAL EXHIBITION of INDUSTRY, SCIENCE and ART 1886

This exhibition was held in the Meadows and I made a reference to it in Chat No 1.

As part of the Exhibition there was specially created an "Old Edinburgh Street". In this street there were facsimiles of a sample of old Edinburgh houses and buildings. Entrance was by the Netherbow Port and the replica buildings contained there were The Twelve Apostles' House, French Ambassador's Chapel, House in Dickson's Close, Bowhead Corner House, Earl of Hyndford's House, Nameless House from the Cowgate, Las Deo House, Cunzie House, Paul's Wark, Symson the Printer's House, Mary of Guise's Oratory, the Tolbooth, Gourlay's House, Cardinal Beaton's House, Old Assembly Rooms, Black Turnpike, Cowgate House fornent Mint Close, the Cross, Parliament Stairs and Major Weir's House.

What a pity this replica street had not been retained after the exhibition and given future generations the opportunity to see buildings which, apart from the Cross, are all gone.

#### TEASER

#### Where and what was Paul's Wark?

The building sometimes known as Paul's Work changed its character and function over the centuries. The building stood at the foot of Leith Wynd where the eastern end of Waverley Station is today. The Magistrates built it in 1619 as a charitable work factory. Prior to this there had been a charitable foundation on the site which was established by Thomas Spens, Bishop of Aberdeen, in 1479, for the maintenance of 12 poor men and known as "The Hospital of our Blessed Lady". In 1582 the Magistrates altered the foundation in accordance with the Reformed religion, and all Bedesmen of this Hospital were to be "nae papists but of trew religion; nae blasphemers or Swerers, Drunkard, Cairter, Thieves or Pykers". In 1619 the Magistrates entered into a contract with William Dickson of Delft to bring 7 Dutch weavers to instruct poor boys and girls in the making of woollen stuffs - "Grograrns, Says and Bays" and a special dormer windowed building was constructed. It was decorated with the City Coat of Arms and over the door "God Bless This Wark 1619" The project was considered beneficial and many people enriched the institution with donations. In 1632 part of the building became a House of Correction for the discipline and training of idle vagabonds - apparently harsh discipline! In 1636 it became a temporary prison and in 1650 was used as a temporary hospital for General Leslie's soldiers. 1683 saw it being used for the manufacture of linen but by 1779 the factory was producing broadcloth under private management. In 1843 it was used as the Canongate Free Church. The building was finally demolished in 1849 for the building of the NB Railway station.

Teaser for this edition is: Where is the plaque commemorating Edinburgh's nomination as a World Heritage Site?

#### "BICKERS"

There are many facets of Edinburgh's history but one of the strangest is the street fights, the "Bickers", as referred to in Walter Scott's writings and in which he participated. The Bow was generally the battleground, with the conflict taking place between the 'Grassmarket and West Port Laddies' and the 'Castlehill and Lawnmarket Callants'. Down to the first bend it belonged to the High Toun with the line drawn between the Old Assembly Rooms to the entrance to the close that led to Major Weir's House. The youthful defenders of the "Bow Marches" defended and guarded their domain keenly. The news that a "Bicker" was imminent spread rapidly by word of mouth between the boys and as the hour approached boys "gentle and sempl" were to be seen hurrying to the rendezvous armed with sticks and shinties and with pockets bulging with an assortment of stones. Leaders were autocratic, obedience was imperative, social ostracism the punishment for dissenters. If the Town Guard arrived on the scene there was an immediate merger of the youths against the common enemy. "Bickers" were obviously dangerous to life and property but the elder citizens regarded the matter with equanimity. It was their own children and their neighbours' who were involved; they were feuding as their fathers had done before. In fact, over their cups, fathers related with pride the battles in which they had participated in the past. Elder citizens could get so excited over the current "tulzie" that they could not contain themselves and joined in. One example of this was Tam o' the Cowgate, Lord President of the Court of Session who did just that! It is said that Thomas Nelson, who had a shop at the top end of the Bow and who was founder of the publishing firm of Thomas Nelson and Son, when a "Bicker" was imminent said "Shut the shop, the lads must hae their training" and watched from a window with friends. David Baird, later to become Sir David and a great military commander, earned his early laurels as a leader of a Bow "Bicker".

#### TAILORS' HALL, COWGATE

One of the finest remains of Old Edinburgh is now a hotel and bar. The building lay virtually derelict for a number of years after having been closed down as part of the old Campbell's Brewery. It was reached through a broad archway above which was a stone tablet bearing the insignia of the Tailors' Craft, a huge pair of scissors or shears, with the date 1644 and the following inscription :-"Almighty God who founded, built, and crouned this work with blessings, make it abound". Through the archway was the yard of the brewery, bounded on the south by the Tailors' Hall, a three-storey building dated 1621. The building was put to many uses since the guild members first sat there to discuss their business. On February 27 1638 a great meeting of ministers was held there, 300 in all, together with the Earls of Rothes, Lindsay and Loudon. They met to discuss the terms of the National Covenant which was to be put before the public, for signature, the next day at Greyfriars. The deliberations were lengthy and there were various objections but it is said that Rothes took these objectors out into the garden and there urged them to bury their grievances in mutual assent. This action was apparently successful. Eighteen years later a Board of Commissioners, appointed by Cromwell, sat here to arrange the administration of estates forfeited by Royalists. Around 1727 the premises came alive as a Playhouse. At the time there was fierce opposition by the Council and life was not easy for the Players, though when performances did take place, the house was usually full, maybe as a natural consequence of that opposition. Concerts were legal but stage plays for which money was taken were not. It was not long however before ways were found to defeat the Council's purpose and advertisements such as the following which appeared in the Edinburgh Courant dated 27 January 1743 would appear. '_By the desire of a Lady of Quality, for the benefit of Mrs.Hamilton, on Monday next, being the 31st, will be performed a concert of vocal and instrumental musick ... After the first part of the concert will be given, gratis, the Mourning Bride to which will be added, gratis, the Toy Shop_'. In due course public opinion became too strong for the narrow-minded Church and Council. The Canongate Playhouse was licensed and the Tailors' Hall became the grain store of the Brewery by which action the buiIdings were probably preserved and not destroyed as so many other historic buildings were. So if you pop in there sometime tor a quick refreshment or meal, do appreciate the history which is around you!

#### ADDRESS TO THE OLD TOWN

This verse from an anonymous poem dated 1805 refers to the sadly long gone carillon of bells in St Giles which played tunes operated by a keyboard in the church. Our fine auld Scots tunes ilka day On Giles's bells we sweetly play! For a' wha hear them, croon ilk lay. Unto themselves: Tho' they were grave, twad mak them gay. And care dispel.

#### DID YOU KNOW?

During the first Edinburgh Festival in 1947, the Minister of Fuel in London, on 3 occasions over the telephone, gave us permission to illuminate the Castle.
