### Archie's Notes No. 1

In an effort to introduce a bit more "spice" into our Newsletter I thought that I would add a few lines in each issue with little pieces of Edinburgh history or information you may find interesting or amusing. I hope that we can make it interactive so I will be pleased to receive any comments, ideas, or any piece of historical information which might be of general interest.

I know that all members have an interest in Edinburgh history and that in some cases that interest becomes more specialised into such aspects as Churches, Houses, Architecture, etc. In my case the interest is in the historical minutiae of Old Edinburgh, these fragments that are almost lost to us unless we look for them very carefully. Some examples are inscribed stones (surprise, surprise), plaques, Cab Stand kerb stones, Castle Boundary stones etc. Unlike buildings, these small, apparently insignificant, items can be removed or destroyed without our noticing but they are still a valuable part of our heritage. An example of this occurred recently when Ginny Spencer noticed that the brass Sanctuary marks at Holyrood had been painted over. Ginny wrote to the appropriate department of the Council and the paint has been removed. A perfect illustration of keeping our eyes open!

I have done a little research into Cab Stand kerb stones and discovered where a number of the main Cabbie stands were in the old days. I have looked at some of these sites and have now discovered 8 locations but in others there is no sign of them. I continue the pursuit and will keep you posted. I am preparing a series of slides which I call 'Edinburgh - Lost and Found' and these will record some of these fragments of our history.

Inscribed stones are fascinating and, apart from the Royal Mile, I have discovered a number of unusual items in out of the way places. One of my favourites is "Hae God Hae A'". You have certainly passed it at some time, so a little teaser. Where is it? The answer will be in the next issue.

#### DID YOU KNOW?

On 15th April 1808 a gentleman undertook, for a bet, to run from Register House to the top of Arthur's Seat and back in 50 minutes. Starting at 6am he reached the summit in 20 minutes, rested and refreshed himseIf for 5 minutes and returned to the starting point 11 minutes under the allotted time. A considerable amount of betting took place. Can anyone beat it?

There have been two International Exhibitions in Edinburgh, in 1886 and 1890. The first, held in the Meadows, was opened by Prince Albert Victor on 6th May 1886 and closed on 3rd October. The total number of persons attending was 2,769,779. Queen Victoria visited the Exhibition in August. The second Exhibition, opened on 1st May 1890 by the Duke of Edinburgh, was held at Colinton Road. The Lord Mayor of London accompanied by Aldermen and Sheriffs visited the Exhibition on 19th June. The Exhibition closed on 1st November but it had not been as financially successful as previously. The Scottish National Exhibition was opened at Saughton on 1st May 1908, by Prince Arthur of Connaught. During his stay in the city he resided with Sir Robert Cranston at Dunard, Grange Loan, now the site of new housing development. There was also a 'Forestry Exhibition' opened by the Marquis of Lothian in the grounds of Donaldson's Hospital on 1st July 1884. It was visited in August by the Prince and Princess of Wales.
