### THE  HISTORY OF THEATRE IN SCOTLAND

_By Marion Jamieson_

#### BACKGROUND INFORMATION

Scotland had its own Mystery, Morality and Miracle Plays and it had strolling players who were known as "Guisards" but this walk is concerned with the many, many theatres and playing areas in Edinburgh which have now vanished.

In 1456 James IV made over, by charter, the valley or low ground between the rock called Craigingalt and the road to Leith (_now callit the grenesyde_) for tournaments, sports etc.

On 15th June 1554: *The Provost, Bailies and Council ordanis the Treasurer-to pay the werkmen, carteris, panteris and utheris that furneist thegrayth - and of the play maid that samyn day".*

Twelve days later *"the bailies sitt and in judgemnet - to content and pay to the maister of wark and of the makar of the playing place the sowme of xxiiij li for compleiting thereof".*

The playing place was not completed for that sum and, on 20th July 1554, it was ordered that the Treasurer paid *"the maister of werk the sowm of xlij li .xiij s iiij d. makand in the hale the sowm of ane hundreth merkis and that to complete the playfield now biggand in the Grenesid."*

More money was paid to the *"werkmen"* who *"completit"* the play field on 18th August and between then and 12th October some plays seem to have been performed. On the latter date there is an entry that "_The Provost oirdanis - to pay WaIter Bynnyng the sowme of v li for making the play ijraith and paynting of the Lansenye and the players facis - and that he should provide viiI play hattis, and king's crowne, ane myter, ane fullis hude, ane septour, ane pair angell wyngis, twa angell hair, ane chaplet of tryumphe._"

Sophisticated stuff if they had scenery, a make-up artist and such an extensive property dept! It seems that Mary of Guise was an enthusiastic playgoer since one of the Treasurer's accounts shows an amount for making "*of the Queen's grace hous on the playfield - and the player's hous* etc*." for a performance of "Ain Satyre of the Thrie Estates"* (which she had already seen with her husband at Linlithgow in 1539).

She probably needed her "_hous_" since it is recorded that the performance "*lestand fra nyne houris before none, till six houris at euin"* - one spectator has left us the information that he sat for those nine hours on the slope of the hill! On 28th December 1554 there is a record of a "_litill farsche and play_" being done for her - but surely not in the winter at *Grenesyd*! It is worth noting that, at this time, secular plays were banned in England and morality plays were still going strong enough in Scotland to be condemned from the pulpit in 1661.

In1558, the first marriage of Mary, Queen of Scots, was celebrated by an unnamed play and, when she entered her capital in August 1561, payment was made for "_Triumphis and fairssis_". There is no further mention of "_Grenesid_" once theatres began to spring up in the Old Town but the site beside St. Mary's Cathedral acquired a circus arena which became a theatre under various names - details to follow -the last incarnation being Edinburgh's final Theatre Royal Mark 3 whose final fire in the 1940s burnt out the auditorium but left the back stage area as a theatre store (while there was one of Edinburgh's usual debates about whether to re-build it again or not) until it was swept away so that the site became part of the St. James complex.

Fires were so much a part of theatre history that it may be as well to give some details of how they are controlled now, in case of awkward questions! Few people outside the theatre know of them, so here they are.

Every theatre with a conventional "picture frame" stage must have a Safety Curtain. By law this must be lowered during every performance and it is usually done during the first interval. The Safety Curtain is a rigid structure of steel and asbestos, anything from 9" - l' thick, which is lowered by a counter-weight system down a metal track built in to the proscenium arch on each side, thus effectively sealing off the stage area. It is lowered, also, at the end of the performance and kept down until the stage is to be used next. All openings in the proscenium are sealed by steel doors - the exits from the orchestra pit, the pass doors etc.- the proscenium wall rises some feet above the roof so that a fire on one side cannot spread across to the other area by the rafters. The stage is sealed off from the dressing-rooms by another thick steel door and beside this is a fire hydrant and a hose. Buckets of sand are placed in various areas around there. Before every first night, whether it is a brand new production or one on tour, two fire officers come on to the stage with a lit taper and test every piece of fabric that is to be used, to be certain that it is fire-proof. Half an hour before a performance a fireman comes in and "signs on" by 'phoning his station on his own direct line. He remains at the side of the stage through the entire performance until the final lowering of the safety curtain then he "signs off" by 'phoning his station again.Now-a-days no naked flame is allowed in the stage area (the gas emergency lights being contained don't count) and if the action of the play demands that a match or a lighter be used then permission must be given by the fire officer in charge.

One stage word that I had better explain is "rake". The only stage that I have ever seen that was absolutely flat was the stage of the Empire Theatre - ballet companies loved it! - but it was flat because it was built as a Music Hall and acrobats, trick cyclists etc. require a flat working area. Every other stage has a rake or slope down from the back of the stage to the footlights. This is not obvious from front of house but is so definite in the Lyceum that any actor/actress who has to use a wheel chair for their part has to be very careful indeed to park it at the correct angle and to see that the brake is hard on. Someone who set up one of the high electrician's ladders across the stage instead of up and down fell off into the orchestra pit and was killed! This is to explain one of the Playhouse stories which might otherwise puzzle someone who didn't know. It's easy enough to explain if you have the use of your hands but not on paper!

Two other stage phrases have cropped up:- A batten is a row of lights fastened to a horizontal bar to give overall illumination of the stage area. A sky border is a deep band of canvas, painted light blue, hung in front of the batten so that it is not visible to the audience.

#### GREENSIDE

It has been a play area since the 1450s. Mary of Guise attended a performance of "*The Thrie Estates"* here in 1554 when a "*house"* was specially built for her and another one for the players. The stage seems to have been there already and the other spectators were in the open air. One left a record of sitting on the slope of the hill for nine hours and another account says that the play started at 9am and finished at 6pm! Other accounts for the many productions there include payment for painted scenery, stage make-up and things like wigs and crowns. It doesn't seem to have been used for plays after the latter part of the 16th century.

#### BROUGHTON ST/LEITH WALK CORNER

Prior to 1788, a wooden structure was erected on this site and this building and the ones that followed it had a great variety of names:- "Circus", "Sadler's Wells", Corri's Concert Room", the "Pantheon", the" Caledonian" the "Adelphi" and, eventually, the "Theatre Royal". (Hereinafter to be referred to as T.R.Mk 3).

In 1788, the Circus proprietors appealed for funds to build an amphitheatre. They had Â£2,200 subscribed and the first permanent structure was built. The subscribers being granted free entrance - a right their successors "the renters" enjoyed, certainly until the end of the last century. It opened as the "Amphitheatre" or "Edinburgh Equestrian Circus" in 1790. In 1793 it makes its first appearance as a theatre, when John Kemble moved there, briefly, from the Theatre Royal (Mk 2). At the end of 1793, it became the "New Sadler's Wells". In 1795 it reverted to various circus names:- "New ", "Royal", "Jones's Royal" etc. Nothing is known of it between 1799 and 1803 when it opened as "Corri's New Rooms".

In 1809 Henry Siddons (Kemble's nephew) got the Royal Patent and moved the Theatre Royal to the Circus (by this time Scott was a shareholder in the T.R.Mk2) and it remained as the T.R.until 1811 when Siddons moved back to the T.R.Mk 2 and it reverted to Corri. He produced musical entertainments and in 1817 it became "Corrie's New Pantheon". Although he was not allowed to put on burlettas and operas he did and he went on to produce melodramas including the first version in Edinburgh of 'Rob Roy". This version had been done in Perth but it preceded all the more famous productions at the T.R.Mk2.

The theatre closed as "The Pantheon" in 1822 and was remodelled and re-opened in 1823 as the "Caledonian Theatre". One play put on in March 1823 was "Tom and Jerry in Edinburgh". William Murray, a grand-son of Bonnie Prince Charlie's secretary, Murray of Broughton, acquired the Patent of both the T.R.Mk2 and the "Caledonian" and changed the name of the latter to the "Adelphi". In 1836 the theatre was re-modelled again (new staircases, lobbies, etc). In 1853 the Patent of both theatres was held by H.Wyndham and on the 20th May his wife gave birth to a son in one of the upper storeys of the theatre. This son later became the Wyndham of Howard and Wyndham the builder/owners of the Royal Lyceum and the King's Theatres. Four days later a theatre workman saw flames coming out from under one of the boxes. The alarm was raised but the theatre burnt down completely Mrs Wyndham and her son were carried out safely!

Sometime after the fire, when Wyndham had moved to the T.R.Mk 2, the theatre was re-built with a capacity of 1,800 - more than either the Lyceum or King's of to-day - and re-christened the "Queen's Theatre and Opera House". It opened on 19/12/55 and closed 26/7/57 after a period of disastrously bad management. Wyndham, having to move from the T.R.Mk 2 because of its purchase by the government to build the General Post Office, opened again at the "Queen' s Theatre and Opera House" on 23/11/57. The Patent was transferred to the Queen's in June 1859.

In January 1865 the "gas man" lighting the "battens" accidentally set fire to a sky border and, once more, the theatre burned down. The firemen had difficulty saving St.Mary's as the north gable of the theatre showed signs of bulging out. A chimney stack fell on the chapel and several men endeavouring to rescue moveables were crushed. The Dean of Guild, Lorimer, tried to rescue one of them but the north wall fell and killed him and the man he was trying to save.

The third theatre building on the site was opened on 2/12/65, Wyndham again the lessee - and this building burned down on 30/6/84 but was open for business again on 29/12/84. I'm not sure if it was burned and re-built again before the last fire in the 1940s when the auditorium was destroyed - the fire broke out about 2am and, at the time, it was thought that a cigarette end or carelessly discarded match had been to blame. The stage area remained intact as a theatre store while the controversy raged as to whether it should be re-built again or not. Eventually it was pulled down to make way for the St.James's Centre.

#### HOLYROOD REAL TENNIS COURT

From the16th c., the real tennis court at Holyrood was used as a "playground". It lay east of the Watergate and at an angle to Abbeystrand. This tennis court burnt down in 1774.

In 1593 there was a visit of "English Comedians". (At that period, and for a century or two later, "comedian"= actor). One of the actors in this company was called Fletcher and he and his company were given a warrant to act in public (as opposed to act before the court) by James VI. They decided on Blackfriars Wynd for their performances despite protests from the Church.

In 1601, the Lord Chamberlain's Men were ordered out of London by Elizabeth who was infuriated by them producing "Richard II". Forced to go on tour, Fletcher, who had joined them by this time, suggested that they came north. James VI welcomed them warmly and after they had played for him for some time he gave them permission to call themselves "The King's Men" and sent them off to Aberdeen so that the Aberdonians could see what good acting was. The Aberdonians were so impressed that they made EACH MEMBER OF THE COMPANY a Freeman. The resident playwright of the company at this time was one William Shakespeare so-o-o the late William was, very probably, a Freeman of Aberdeen!

The next definite mention of a play was in 1663 when "Marciano, a tragi-comedy was acted, with great applause, before His Majesty's High Commissioner -- at the Abbey of Holyroodhouse on St. John's night. In 1668 a performance of Sydserf's comedy "Tarugo's Wiles or The Coffee House" took place in the tennis court and in both 1669 and 1670 the "_Counsell_" gave permission for various plays. About 1672 rules were made to prevent people dressing above their station but players were exempt as to the *cloathes* of which they make use upon the stage. In 1673 two "masters of the revels" showed the Town Council permission they had received from the Privy Council to set up stages in any part of the city. The Duke of York (James VII & II) came to Holyrood in 1679 bringing with him a company of actors from London. The last mention of any plays/players at Holyrood was a comedy "Mithridates, King of Pontus" performed on 15/11/1681 *"wheirin Lady Anne, the Duke's daughter, and the ladies of honour ware the onlie actors".*

#### CANONGATE THEATRE or CONCERT HALL

An actor, named Ryan, from the Covent Garden Theatre laid the foundation stone for this new Theatre/Concert Hall in 1746 and it opened the following year.

The "Culloden" riot occurred in 1749. Some drunk "military gentlemen" called on the orchestra to play "Culloden". Some civilians in the audience demanded "You're Welcome Charles Stewart" - and got it! The officers drew their swords and chased the musicians away and then leapt on to the stage. One lost his footing and fell on his back to the unrestrained glee of the civilians. The officers, pounded with missiles from the gallery, charged upstairs to attack their assailants. The galleryites barred the door with benches they had torn up and the Highland Chairmen - Jacobites all - followed the officers upstairs waving their chair-poles. The officers caught in the middle were forced to surrender and the management posted a notice next day that the orchestra must not play any music not approved by them!

In 1752 John Lee, who had worked for, and quarrelled with, David Garrick decided to come north, buy the Theatre and settle down as its manager. It had not been successful as it had been badly managed. Lee had talent, energy and administrative ability but no tact and found it difficult to get on well with his fellow actors. He altered many things in the theatre, none of the audience being allowed to sit on the stage etc. He made improvements in the decorations and scenery and then decided to update the effects, particularly the Thunder machinery. He acquired some 9lb shot, a wheel-barrow into which he had it loaded and he had slats laid at the back of the stage. A carpenter wheeled the barrow back and forth across the slats and a very satisfactory roll of thunder resulted. On the strength of this Lee put on "King Lear" with himself in the title role. One night while he was in the middle of the storm scene the "Thunder God" slipped and down fell god, barrow and shot. The balls ran down the rake of the stage flattening the scenery on top of "Lear", bounced into the orchestra pit and smashed the bass fiddle, scattering the orchestra. The "Thunder- God" lay prostrate on the stage while "Lear", having extricated himself from the scenery, danced with rage.

In 1754-55 a low comedian, Tom Lancashire, joined the company and remained with it for the rest of his life. He was very popular and ran a tavern at the corner "opposite St. Mary's Street" at first and then, later, in the New Town. He was known as "Sir Cape" because of the 'Cape Club' meeting in his tavern and from the fact of his being its first "sovereign" Fergusson wrote his epitaph:

"Alas, poor Tom, how oft with merry hearts, Have we beheld thee play the sexton's part! Each merry heart must now be grieved to see, The sexton's dire part performed on thee."

The 14th December 1756 saw the first performance of John Home's Tragedy "Douglas". At this opening performance, at the end of a stirring speech, one of the audience cried out "Whaur's yur Wullie Shakespeare noo!" Despite much praise it brought trouble on the head of Home who had to resign his parish of Athelstaneford. Another minister was banned from his pulpit for six months, despite his saying that he had taken great trouble not to be seen at the play! It was the custom for gentlemen, wishing to see a play, to send their footmen to reserve seats for them. The footmen were then allowed to see the play, free, from the footman's gallery.

On 16th January 1760 a farce, "High Life Below Stairs", was to be performed for the first time in Edinburgh but the footmen in the City, suspecting that it was an insult to them, opposed the production. Before curtain up, the manager came on stage and read a letter threatening both managers and playhouse if it was put on and stating that over 70 people were determined to stop it. The audience demanded the play, the footmen in the gallery started creating bedlam, the gentlemen in the pit yelled to them to shut up or they would be thrown out of the theatre and never allowed in again, and, in fact, that was what had to happen before the farce could start. Thereafter the footman's gallery was closed.

The next riot was caused by an actor called Stayley. He was, apparently, an actor but he had a bad habit of "writing up" his own part. One account of his "Macbeth" (not at the Playhouse) said that in the MacDuff fight "*having been ten times, apparently, run through the body and twice down he got up and staggering to the lamps, fell a third time, where up on one knee or writhing in different positions he uttered a dying speech of five and twenty lines composed by himself and at length, expired".* He was so unpopular with the management that they only gave him small parts. Some members of the audience thought he deserved more. Eventually things came to a head when he was not re-engaged and his supporters in the pit yelled for the manager and demanded Stayley's re-instatement. He was waiting in a box and the management was forced to let him come down on to the stage and present his own version of events but the other members of the public shouted him and his supporters down and the show went on. Afterwards his supporters stayed behind and terrorised the management into re-engaging him. The management, furious at having this forced on them, closed the theatre for a fortnight until they thought the furore had died down - they were wrong! When they re-opened on the 24th January 1767 the noise was such that the "ladies were permitted" to leave the theatre and then the audience started to pull it apart. Everything that could be smashed or thrown in the auditorium was smashed or thrown, the musicians tried to defend the orchestra pit but were swept aside and the rioters charged on to the stage. Someone pulled a trap from under the leader and his sudden disappearance shook his followers but the mayhem went on and even the mirror in the green room was smashed. The City Guards were helpless and by the time the soldiers from the Castle arrived the theatre was wrecked and the rioters had vanished. The law tried to take its course and accused some young lawyers and law students who hadn't been innocent on other riotous occasions. An action was brought against them by the proprietors of the theatre for wilful destruction of property but they brought a counter action. As owners of unlicensed premises the proprietors could be regarded as "rogues and vagabonds" The action was quashed but obviously something had to be done so a clause was inserted in the Bill being prepared for the extension of the royalty of the City asking the King to licence a theatre in Edinburgh. This was granted and the new manager, David Ross, deciding that his audience in the future would come largely from the New Town, acquired a field belonging to the Orphans Hospital just at the end of the North Bridge. A square, Shakespeare Square, was built with the theatre in the centre of it but it was not ready for use when the Patent came through. Ross worked desperately to repair the Playhouse and, finally, it opened as the first licensed theatre in Scotland - the first Theatre Royal - on the 9th December 1767 with a production of "The Earl of Essex" and a celebratory prologue by James Boswell. The old theatre remained open until the new theatre was complete. It opened on the 9th December 1769, two years to the day from the first legal performance of a play in Scotland.

#### HIGH ST/BRIDGES

There was a real tennis court opposite the Tron, which was used for theatrical performances but about which very little is known. In 1677 the Town Council gave permission for a rope dancer to erect a stage "within the tennis court opposite the Tron and to put up volting ropes for acting his plays and shows" - and he was to be allowed to charge all his audience 3/- Scots each! Plays continued in the "tennis court" - but whether this one or the one in Holyrood there is no indication - through the early part of the 18th century.

#### CARRUBBER'S CLOSE.

About 1715, Signora Violante settled in Carrubber's Close giving "posturing exhibitions" (Eh?) which were so successful that she hired players and started acting in plays. She opened a very successful dancing school at the foot of the close, where she also taught gymnastics .In one of his poems, Allan Ramsay refers to her. In 1736 "Mdme" Violante the "famous Italian rope dancer" danced on a straight rope for the benefit of the poor and seven nights later she was billed to appear on the slack rope at Carrubber's Close at the "New Theatre" with a Pantomime Entertainment and sword dances performed by Mr Hines and "Mrs" Violante. Signora/Mdme/Mrs Violante seems to have had a building which, after February 1736, was converted by Allan Ramsay in to a theatre. This was the first regular theatre in Scotland and opened on the 8th November 1736 with the "Recruiting Officer" and the "Virgin Unmasked". Mdme Violante moved her act to the Old Assembly Hall and did some remarkably odd dances! She danced a minuet on a rope. She danced "on a board laid upon a rope without its being anyway fastened thereto". Danced with two boys fastened to her feet. Danced on the rope "with 2 as heavy men as any in town, fastened to her feet". Danced with two swords at her feet. "She performs the exercise of the colours on the rope, to the surprise (and I should think so!) of all spectators". She remained a dance teacher until her death in 1741. Allan Ramsay's theatre lasted just over six months. In June 1737, by an Act of George II, nobody could ask payment for a play not performed in a playhouse granted a Patent by the government - a Theatre Royal. For the next thirty years putting on a play without a Patent was a risky business. In January 1739 plays are, once more, advertised in Carrubber's Close. For safety sake the actors lived in sanctuary at Holyrood Abbey! In March the Courts won their battle to shut the theatres and people started to look for a way round the rules.

#### BLACKFRIAR'S WYND

James VI gave the players from England, in 1593, permission to play to the general public and the location they chose was Blackfriar's Wynd. ln 1663 John Ponthus, a professor of physic, was given permission to build a stage "_doun about Blackfriar's Wynd head ,for public view, they acting no obscene thing to give offence"._

17th March 1682 brought the best Blackfriar's Wynd story when the Town Council gave William Heartly, an Edinburgh merchant, permission to build a timber house 40 long and 20' wide in the High Street *"below the Blackfriar's Wynd head".* On 27th October, before the theatre was finished, the Council ordered it demolished because of complaints from the surrounding inhabitants. They declared, also, that "_from henceforth noe stadge or playhouse be erected or built upon any part of the high street."_

#### SKINNER'S HALL

Skinner's Hall stood in Skinner's Close between South Gray's Close and Toddrick Wynd. Anthony (Tony) Aston seems to have come to Edinburgh first about 1723 by invitation and established a reputation as a highly respectable person since, in 1726, he was given express permission from the Provost and Magistrates to perform plays and Allan Ramsay wrote a Prologue for him to give at his first performance.

In November 1727 the Town Council had changed and did not agree with their predecessors action and the new magistrates fined him for contempt and padlocked the door of Skinner's Hall. Aston was furious and went to law. The Town Council's lawyer said that Aston had nothing in writing and verbal promises from the last magistrates didn't count. There was no Scots Law bearing on this so the Lords of Session (reputedly under pressure from their wives) found in Aston's favour but in a few days the magistrates won. Lady Morrison lived in the flat under Skinner's Hall and petitioned the Council that as the building was old and frail, the large number of people witnessing the plays "_bended_" her roof to such an extent that "*her house was in danger of being destroyed by the fall of the floor".* Aston was summoned before the magistrate but he insisted that Lady Morrison be put on oath. The magistrates ordered the City Guard to stop any meetings in Skinner's Hall until the *"place be visited".* Fifteen skilled tradesmen testified that the walls and floors were unsafe and the Town Council paid them for their opinion! Aston appealed to the Lords of Session again on the grounds that the Town Council had not obeyed the previous decree. The Town Council counter appealed. The row rumbled on for months but, eventually, Aston had to give up and he left Edinburgh in 1728.

#### NETHERBOW.

Not strictly speaking a theatre, this still had its quota of theatrical performances. Every state entry into Edinburgh was greeted by playlets at various points, the last always being the Netherbow Gate. Margaret Tudor was welcomed by Justice treading Nero underfoot. Force bearing a pillar etc. Mary, Queen of Scots had a sterner greeting being handed a Bible and only saved (by a last minute change of mind on the part of the organisers) from being shown a priest hanged in effigy! Eventually, Thomas Este found a way round the rules. Although it was illegal to charge an entrance fee for a play it was not illegal to charge for a concert! So, in the course of time, concerts were billed with the added attraction of "Richard III" or "King Lear" or whatever.

#### TAILORS' HALL

The Edinburgh Company of Comedians played in the town from 1728-32. They opened in June 1733 in some unidentified playhouse but by December were in "The Edinburgh Theatre at Tailors' Hall". They continued to act there until February 1736 when the theatre was remodelled. This was after Mdme Violante's tight rope dance but there is probably no connection! From 1739 - December 1741 there is no record of any plays in Edinburgh when "Pamela" was performed but there is no suggestion of where.

13th March 1742 *"By desire of his Grace the Duke of Hamilton, for the benefit of the Masters Hamilton, at the Tailors' Hall, will be performed a Concert of Vocal and Instrumental Musick after which, gratis, "She wou'd and she wou'd not" to which will be added, by desire, the "Honest Yorkshireman", performed by Lilliputians".* In October the Company played "The Beggar's Opera". All of this and subsequent theatrical activity seems to have been due to Thomas Este's brainwave. After his death in 1745 the performance of plays in Tailors' Hall stuttered and stopped, the Canongate taking over.

The building of the new theatre in the Canongate is said to have been the result of a quarrel in the company at Tailors' Hall and when it was built the best of the actors accompanied Mrs Ward to the rival establishment. She and her husband, a comedian, came to Edinburgh C.1745.

#### OPERA HOUSE.

The exact date of the building of the Opera House is uncertain but it was built on what had been Adam Square and when the University took it down in the early 1950s they replaced it with a theatre in the basement of Adam House. It might, perhaps, be worth noting that when it was demolished the powers-that-be in Edinburgh were, busily, debating the pros and cons of building an Opera House!

#### EMPIRE THEATRE.

The first Empire Theatre was built in Nicolson Street, on the site of a hotel, in 1891 and had a movable roof. There was a disastrous fire there in May 1911. A German Jew, The Great Lafayette, who was a magician and illusionist and a friend of Houdini, came to Edinburgh with his own complete show in order to give a Command Performance before the then Prince of Wales. He had various animals in his act including a dog to which he was devoted - devoted to the extent that he had a drawing of the dog on his cheques and his cheque book- but the week before the fire his dog died. He hunted round Edinburgh for some place where he could have it buried and, eventually, Piershill Cemetery agreed to take the dog on condition that wherever in the world he died he was brought back and buried there too. The following week, on the 19th May, he was performing an illusion which required him to disappear in a cloud of smoke and flames and re-appear somewhere else .He had, of course, a double although this was not generally known. Something went wrong with the smoke and fire effect and the theatre burst into flames. The Fire curtain was lowered and the front of house was saved but seventeen people, including the Great Lafayete, were killed back-stage. He had decreed that he should be cremated so the body identified as his was taken to Glasgow for that purpose. It was on its way back when a second body was discovered and it was more positively identified as Lafayette so this corpse also was cremated. On the day of the funeral the street from Dunbar's Funeral parlour in Lothian Road down to Princes Street, along Regent Road and right down to the cemetery was lined ten deep with people - the greatest crowd, possibly, that Edinburgh had ever seen.

The theatre was rebuilt as a Music Hall and continued as such, with first class acts, until the Bingo boom of the '50's when it succumbed and became merely a Bingo Hall. It had also been used for large scale Musical Comedies - Novello brought his Drury Lane spectaculars there- for Ballet during the Festival and for enormous Festival stage productions such as the one of "A Midsummer Night's Dream" with Helpman and Shearer as Oberon and Titania and Stanley Holloway as Bottom!

#### THE SOUTHMINSTER

Further up Nicolson Street, on the other side of the road, stood THE SOUTHMINSTER. It was built, originally, in the 1820s by Ducrow as an amphitheatre and circus. In 1830 it became the "Royal Amphitheatre late Ducrow's" In the 1840s it was "Cooke's Circus". A stage was built for plays and in 1853-4 Wyndham's Company used it while the Adelphi was the Theatre Royal. It then became the Dunedin Hall and later the Alhambra Music Hall. On the 14th March 1875 it burnt to the ground. It was rebuilt and re-opened on the 13th December 1875 as the "Queen's Theatre". It was burnt again and the site subsequently became devoted to circus and variety.

#### THE ROYAL PRINCESS' S THEATRE.

This theatre is in the Street Directory in 1884 and was also in Nicolson Street and in about the same position as the previous theatre so it may have been a new name. Anyway it had vanished completely by the turn of the century.

#### THE VICTORIA TEMPLE

The Victoria Temple shared the National Gallery/R.S.A. site with a large wooden rotunda, originally opened in 1823 to exhibit pictures of the Battle of Waterloo. In 1848 it was granted a licence as The Royal Victoria Theatre but was pulled down towards the end of 1849 to allow for the building of the galleries.

#### THE PRINCE OF WALES OPERETTA HOUSE

A rather grand name for what had been known as the Waterloo Rooms. Its only claim to fame is that Irving acted there in April 1865.

#### THEATRE ROYAL Mk 2

After riots in the Canongate Playhouse and threats of action against the proprietors who, as owners of the unlicensed theatre, would have been classed as rogues and vagabonds incurring a penalty of being "stripped naked from the middle and openly whipped until his or her body be blooded, may be sent to the house of correction there to be kept at hard labour" spurred them on to apply for a Patent. Four of the aforesaid proprietors were Judges of the Supreme Court and several other Lords of Session had sons who would have been involved! The action was quashed but, obviously, something had to be done so a clause was added to the Bill being prepared for the extension of the royalty of the city asking the King to licence a theatre in Edinburgh. This was granted and the licence or Patent was given to David Ross. He decided that the New Town, although just beginning, was where his audience of the future would live and he fixed on a field owned by the Orphans Hospital. A famous preacher, Whitfield, was accustomed to setting up his tent in this field and charging admittance to those who wished to attend his sermons. When he found a theatre being built he nearly exploded with rage and had to be forcibly restrained from setting fire to the new building! The theatre formed part of a scheme of houses which was called Shakespeare Square. Many of the actors and actresses in the stock company lodged or had rooms in these houses After various vicissitudes including the collapse of the North Bridge the theatre was opened on the 9th December 1769 with a play called "The Conscious Lovers". The first season was not a success - too much had been spent on the building, scenery etc., and not enough on the actors. Between 1769 and 1784 the theatre had a very chequered career but, on 22nd May 1784,after her hugely successful season in London Mrs Siddons was persuaded to come to Edinburgh Her first appearance was as Belvedira in "Venice Preserved .She was accustomed to having every speech cheered and when the Scots sat in total silence she re-doubled her efforts .Finally, in despair, when she reached one of the great "set piece" speeches she gave it all - and more! - than she had. This, too, was met with total silence until a considering voice said, "That's no bad!" the audience rocked with laughter - and Sarah was in!! She was "in" to the extent that the Church of Scotland changed the times of the meetings of the General Assembly so that "the young ministers could have the advantage of appreciating her elocution"!! It became fashionable among the ladies to faint at the power of Mrs Siddons acting. "Lang" Sandy Wood was kept busy rushing from one faintin' fit fair to another and, as he passed a friend, the friend said, My Sandy, this is grand acting!" "Aye, said Sandy, And a damned sight too much of it!" One evening the play was "The Fatal Marriage" and Mrs Siddons was so carried away that she had to be helped off stage. Miss Gordon of Gight in Aberdeenshire,- a young heiress - was carried, hysterical, out of her box screaming the words Mrs S. had spoken, "Oh my Biron !my Biron!" A year later she met and married the Hon.John Biron. Their son was Lord Byron. Scott had been friendly with both Mrs Siddons and her brother, John Kemble and he worked actively for her son Henry Siddons to take over the Theatre Royal in 1809. Henry moved the Patent to the Leith Walk Circus for a period but returned to the Theatre Royal Mk 2. He died suddenly in 1814 and the Patent was taken over by his brother-in-law, Murray. When George IV visited Edinburgh in 1822 it was arranged that he should attend a play on the 27th August. The great English actor, Edmund Kean, was working with the stock company at this time and he was the only person to be upset and angry by the choice of "Rob Roy" for the special performance. After the performance on 26th August a horde of workmen descended on the theatre to make it ready for the King. The box-office was converted into a" handsome apartment, brilliant with lamps" separated from the magnificent portico (which was over a platform covered in crimson cloth, to form the Royal Entrance) by a pair of folding doors. One of the attending Yeoman of the Guard exclaimed "Come, this beats Lunnon yet!" The King approved but would-be denizens of the pit and gallery were not so lucky! The doors were not due to open until 6pm but the crowd started to gather at noon and by 2pm the crowd was dense. It poured with rain and when the doors finally opened the first people there were lifted from their feet and whirled around so that in many cases the last were first and the first luckr. if they were not last in no time at all! Soon after 6pm the 'House Full" board was displayed with a crowd still thronging the door. Several people followed the example of "a stout athletic Gael" and climbing over the heads of the crowd,. got in through the top section of the door. Almost every person of rank and/or distinction arrived to occupy the boxes circa 7.30pm (the curtain was due to rise at 8.00pm) and at 8.10pm the King arrived - presumably having obeyed the instruction on the play-bill that "All carriages will set down with the horses heads towards Waterloo Place and take up in the opposite direction."! "Rob Roy" was only one of a great number of "Waverley" novels that were adapted for the stage. In Scott's diary under 2/3/27 he records an over-heard conversation at the theatre.1st Lady, "Who wrote Shakespeare? 2nd Lady, "Ben Johnson." 3rd Lady, "Finis". William Murray, "No, it is Sir Waiter Scott, he confessed it at a public meeting the other day!" On the 2nd April 1849 "Maurice Power, son of the famous Tyrone Power --- made his first professional appearance in Great Britain". Presumably a several times great grand-father of the film star Tyrone Power. William Murray retired from the stage in 1857 and died a year later in S.Andrews. On his retirement the theatre monopoly was broken, the Theatre Royal was taken over by a comedian, Lloyd, while the lease of the Adelphi was taken over by Wyndham. Lloyd failed at the T.R. and it was taken over in 1852 by Rollison and Leslie. When the Adelphi burnt in April 1853 the T.R .was vacant and Wyndham moved in. In January 1857 a new young "walking gentleman "joined the company, only his second engagement, whose name was Henry Brodribb. After about a week he changed his name to Irving and his first appearance was in "Richlieu". He stayed for about two and a half years getting such a valuable grounding in all kinds of comedy and tragedy that he, eventually, became the first theatrical knight. The T.R. finally closed to make way for the G.P.O. on 25/5/59.

#### EXTRA SARAH SIDDONS STORIES

Not to do with Edinburgh but she is said to have trained her daughters to carry their heads properly by sticking a sprig of holly in the neck of their dresses!

Re the General Assembly story another source says that the meetings were deserted until the times were changed.

The TRMk 2 only held 630 people but when Siddons was to play 2550 applications were received!

She dined with Scott at Ashestiel and showed her tendency to talk all the time in blank verse by snapping at a servant; "You've brought me water, boy, - I asked for beer."

Dining with the Lord Provost he apologised for the meat being over-seasoned, "Beef cannot be too salt for me, my Lord."

She was entertained at Almondell by Henry Erskine and his son recited a portion of "Douglas" to her. She was due to leave Edinburgh but offered to remain longer in order to act in a play with him. He had a rush of modesty to the head and declined the offer!

When in Edinburgh she worshipped in St.George's Chapel in York Place.
